Rogue Adventure - Wizard Classic Guide

Introduction
Wizard is the class you unlock after winning a Warrior run, see https://gist.github.com/adufilie/d9f42d6fbc7fe5dc1f7874e8f4f35572 for a great warrior guide fooblizoo did already.
Unlike warrior, wizard focuses on magic cards rather than combat, he has less HP and less defense in his base cards but he has a built in attack strategy with magic points.
Whenever you play a magic card, you gain a magic point on your magic counter. Then when you play energy golem you can deal damage equal to you magic counter.
This suggests to use energy golem as attack strategy and use your others cards to either increase your magic counter and/or defend yourself.
Wizard also tends to have more mana which helps get the magic points and make the fights easier by playing more cards every turn.
Contrary to warrior, from inferno 1 to 10 World 1 can be done with not much more than base deck.
However past i10 it becomes the most difficult part of the run, because you need to improve your deck quickly before first elite and then to defeat Gorilla King or
Evil Forest Guardian.
You will lose some runs early simply because you didn't find any good cards. Don't feel too bad about it.

This guide aims to help both beginners in low infernos (1-10) and advanced players in high infernos (20+). Some advice applies for both and some is more specific.
This guide is for classic mode, it should apply to hell which is quite similar but probably not to void where many new strategies can appear.
Finally I do not take into account when the cards are unlocked, if you haven't all the cards unlocked yet (level 30) you can read this guide and try with the cards available
to you, but I strongly recommend trying stuff by yourself to learn which cards are good, which ones are bad and which ones synergies well together.


Description of abilities:
Gain 1 magic point (MP) per magic card played. These magic points determine energy golem damage.

Class upgrade: At 10 MP you get a first sphere, and at 20 you get a second one. Each sphere gives you +1 base mana at the start of your turn
(if you reach 10 MP during your turn, you only get the mana next turn) and makes golem warrior attack once more.

Base deck:
4x Golem warrior : deal 4 damage, attacks once more per sphere (this becomes a multihit attack with spheres, beware of enemies with effect base on number of hits : mushrooms, rockhorn, electric jellyfish, greater void essence, demon of the deep, chaos nest, black furry, queen of snakes, bone commander)
3x Mud golem : deal 2 damage, gain 3 shields, apply 3 weak
1x Energy golem : deal damage equal to magic points to all enemies (this is pure damage, unaffected by strength, double damage, weak or dark grasp. It also doesn't count as a hit on mushrooms, rockhorn, electric jellyfish and sapphire drake)


Some important tricks to know
When starting a run, you can pick the map you want while keeping your starting bonus. Before you pick your starting bonus, try looking in the background to see 
if it's the map you want. If not, kill the app and re-open it, then start a new run instead of continuing. Your starting bonus will still be offered in the new run.
On very high Infernos (30+) this is a must, as you likely won't be able to survive two consecutive battles before the first Merchant. 
There is one map which has a Merchant after the first fight.

You can restart a fight. Quit from the menu and select continue to restart the fight from the beginning.
Do this if you make a critical error or an important random outcomeis not favorable.
Key of the Portal (Skill) protects you from a bad starting hand. Combine with the restart fight trick above to get the best results.
Besides Key of the Portal, there are other ways to alter the outcome of your first few turns. Although the starting hand and starting deck order for a fight is fixed,
there are a few cards which produce random outcomes that can be optimized by restarting the fight. Some examples: Old Jester, Cthool Acolyte, Cthool Apprentice. 
Night Fairy [FAIRY] shuffles your deck, so you could play Night Fairy during your first turn just to escape a bad opening shuffle.
Similarly, if you can run through your cards once and trigger a new shuffle, you may restart the fight if you find that the second shuffle isn't so good.

Class bonus
Every class unlocks a new class bonus after inferno 3, 5 and 10.
Class bonus 1 doubles strength and resistance from overcharge. You can use it if it's the only one available to you but not that great
Class bonus 2 gives you 2 MP per magic card played. This means energy golem increases his damage twice faster and you get your first sphere after only 5 magic cards played,
and the second after 10 magic cards.
Class bonus 3 lets you get up to 3 spheres instead of 2, but their cost is increased to 15 MP. This means you get first sphere at 15 magic cards played, second at 30 and third at 45.

Once unlocked you should stick to class bonus 2. It will make your damage and extra mana come much faster. Class bonus 3 is so slow it's actually worse than not having any bonus at all.

Starting bonus
You get a starting bonus after every time you've completed first world. You don't have to have a starting bonus but it helps. If you lose in World 1, play a different class
to beat the first Boss and earn your next starting bonus. If you're trying to advance other classes at the same time, you can take this as an opportunity to alternate
between them and Wizard. If you want the starting bonus ASAP, pick one of Shaman with 1st class bonus, Barbarian or Ranger, choose Normal difficulty, and you can beat World 1 in one minute.
You can quit immediately after defeating the Boss, on the rewards screen.

2 Gems - Never pick this. 100 Coins is worth more.
100 Coins - This is the consistency choice, I recommend it up to I20, I personnally used it up to I30 but if you want you can keep using it until I40 where rare card or skill is necessary to win first fight
Random Rare - This is probably your best option past I20. They are some great starting bonus that will help you a lot, best are Elder Fairy and Druid of the High Elves which can bring you up to I61.
However you might end up with a useless card most of the time, wasting your starting bonus, which is why I recommend it only after I20.
Random Skill - You can try your luck here, but there are a lot of skills. Most of the time you will get something barely useful if not completely useless.
Random Rare is more likely to give you a good result if you're struggling. However the theoretical max inferno for wizard is I119 and you can only do it with Dark Sigil.
But because you are very unlikely to get it and you will probably die before you find some healing, you should do this only past I61 when it's your only chance of survival.

Picking your path
To maximize your chances of survival, you want a path that gives you the most Merchants and Chests, and the least Elites.
You will want a Merchant early to prepare for the rest of the world, and one close to the Boss so you can use all the Coins you've accumulated so far to prepare for the Boss fight.

General deck strategy
Mana - Every deck benefits from getting extra Mana each turn, so you will want to find a way to do that. The best card for that on wizard is... wizard!
You can also use Souls Priestess but it's not quite as good. Finally you can combine one of these cards with V01-B01 [ROBOT].
Beware of overcharge it will prevent you from getting extra mana.

Defense first - Build up your defense quickly or you will likely lose. Don't get too many attack cards. Look for cards with immune or daze like Snow queen or Medusa [BEASTMAN].
These are the best to defend first turn before you get your spheres and setup your deck. You want to make sure you can draw one of them on turn 1, which is where you are most vulnerable.
These cards exile so you will want a permanent shield cards with multiplying effect like Apprentice Guard. Try to get to a point where you are not losing any HP.

Permanent buffs - Favor Strength and Resistance buffs that last until the end of the fight instead of temporary end-of-turn buffs.
Blue witch, Red witch, Sun Priestess and Wizard of Nature are a couple of the best cards for this.

Magic cards - Try to take only magic cards, you can use a few well chosen combat cards mostly for defense. This is to maximize your magic points 
and also the effect of some cards like blue witch, fairy princess [FAIRY] or elder fairy [FAIRY].

Spheres - You will want to activate your spheres ASAP on each fight. For that you will want many free mana magic cards like old jester, moon fairy [FAIRY], elder fairy [FAIRY].
You can also use magic leaf, since it's activation is free, it counts as 2 magic cards every time you play it. Combined with a overcharge mana card, you might be able
to get a sphere after turn 1 or even both.

Small deck - A smaller deck will be more consistent. When your deck grows to about 12 cards or more, it becomes unlikely that you will see key cards each turn, 
unless you have ways to cycle through your deck faster, it also makes you less likely to draw an immune card on turn 1. On the other hand, a 4 card deck means every card 
you play comes right back in your hand. Note that you must always have at least 6 cards in your deck, but if 2 of them exile or remove, then you're left with a 4 card core.

What reward to take after a fight
Most of the time you should be taking 1 Gem after a fight, unless you see a card that you would have bought anyway or one you know works well with your chosen strategy.
Don't take random cards just because they are free, because they can clog up your hand and make it harder to win.
Even if you see a card that would be good for late game, you may not want to take it early. For early game, prioritize cards that will help you survive.

What to do at the Merchant
Heal - When your HP is low and your defense is not well developed yet, I recommend healing at the Merchant rather than buying a card that will heal you slowly.
If your HP is still over 50% and you think you can survive until the next Merchant, you don't need to heal.

Thin your deck - Your starting deck includes many golem warrior which will get in the way of your main attack card energy golem, and of your defense cards mud golem.
I recommend Removing or Transforming at least two in World 1. If you have enough money for both, start by transforming one so you can remove the new card after if it's bad.
Once you're down to only one golem warrior (removed 3) you can do as you wish:
- stop removing cards (good on low inferno because you don't have that much money)
- remove duplicates of mud golem (duplicates are rarely useful)
- remove last golem warrior (unless you find good strength, energy golem deals more damage so it's a better attack option)
- remove all base cards but energy golem (goal is to have a 4 card core, beware of the order you remove in, you will want to keep a balance between Mud golem and golem warrior early,
with a little more mud golems)

Consider trading Gems for Coins - Once you have 4 Gems, you will be able to trade them for 100 Coins, so keep that in mind when looking at card prices.
Similarly, when you have 7 Gems you can afford the Gold Ingot skill which gives 300 Coins.

Upgrade the class skill - It will give you the sweet extra mana from spheres, and make golem warrior better. On low inferno you don't have enough money so you will have to
wait to do so, on high inferno it's almost priority, with the exception of a few very good cards.

Spend wisely - If you don't see any good options and you think you can survive until the next Merchant, save your Coins and Gems. If the next Merchant is 2 or 3 fights away 
and you think you need to prepare for those, don't be afraid to Reroll cards or skills if you can afford something nice that could show up.

Duplicating - if you have a very good card like elder fairy [FAIRY] you might want to duplicate it for 300 gold in merchant, I recommend this once the res of your deck is
good enough and you just want that extra preparation time in battle.

General great cards:
Common
- Apprentice guard, great scaling shield effect when combined with some resistance and wizard's mana
- Wizard I, long quest to complete but easier for wizard since you're only playing magic cards. One of the few quest cards worth taking on high inferno.
- Young witch, easy 3 mana and overcharge with weak from mud golem
- Old jester, free magic card
- Fairy princess [FAIRY], easy 4 free card spawn
- Earth seed I, only take it if you can complete the quest (after finding apprentice guard for example), unupgraded the card is trash but daze all enemies once upgraded is great

Uncommon
- Snow queen, immune
- Sigil essence, immune and 2 resistance, keep your deck small to get the empty pile requirement
- Blue witch, easy 4 resistance
- Moon Fairy [FAIRY], free magic card and search card
- Medusa I [BEASTMAN], daze an enemy is great, completing the quest makes it even better. Keep in mind that daze can be used to prevent a silence debuff.
- Xatior order of the wizards, daze an enemy, same thing
- Sun priestess, mostly for the 2 resistance
- Cthool acolyte, 20 shield is a lot, and you can use it to remove cards from your deck faster. Very good early game, if you've past world 2 you probably don't need it
- Seeker of the light, removes every debuff including silence, healing is ok

Rare
- Druid of the high elves, gives immune and 2 resistance, which is the main interest, heal can be useful, mana cost is quite high though.
- Elder Fairy [FAIRY], easy 4 free mana, no overcharge, you can play as many as you want in a turn and get insane mana. Worth duplicating for 300 gold in merchant
- V01-B01 [ROBOT], good mana card, the resistance is very good too
- Cthool the Darkmaster [ANCIENT], this card duplicates any exile card you play, if you have snow queen or Earth seed II, you can play it every turn and be untouchable
- Azahr the exiled wizard [ANCIENT], this card duplicates cards from your exile, if you played 4 cards already (easy a swizard with a mana card) you keep it in your deck
and have an infinite cycle of immunes or daze. It's also great without staying in your deck, duplicating an exiled card twice is enough.



Other good cards:
These are mostly replacement card if you don't find what you want
- High priest, free mana card but prevents from searching through your deck
- Souls priestess, gives 2 mana without quest but even on high inferno wizard I is better for wizard. Since Energy golem already gives 1, 
the 1 extra from souls priestess doesn't make it a priority
- Sou, the blade of wind [ANCIENT], gives 2 mana without overcharge if you play it first, it's good but get's in the way if you want to get a 4 card base



Attack Strategies
Try to focus on a single attack strategy. If you have too many attack cards, your deck becomes incoherent and you may not have enough defense. Make sure you build up your 
defense first before committing too many cards to offense.


Attack Strategy: Energy golem with fairy spawns
+ Quick power up during the fight
- Vulnerable in first turns, hard to get going early game

As I said before, energy golem is your main source of damage as wizard. Since it doesn't benefit from any buffs like strength or double damage, the only way to power him up
is to play many magic cards. Fairy spawns are good for that since they put many free mana magic cards in your deck. You will have no use for strength but you might want 
resistance for defense. Blue bloom [FAIRY] and Blessed Fairy [FAIRY][ANGEL] are very good because their spawns give shields which will help you defend while you power up energy golem.
You might want a source of armored like Robowitch [ROBOT] to keep the shields generated by the spawns, because you are likely to use them all in a single turn and have a lot of
overflow shields.
Most of the fairy spawn cards give more cards based on number of fairies in your deck. So you might want to take a couple other fairy cards, but be careful not to take bad ones.
You will eventually run out of spawn cards and will have to finish the fight without them. Energy golem will do all the damage but you need a good defense card. 
Apprentice guard is always a good option for wizard but with the fairy spawn strategy, your fairy race counter lets you use fairy warrior [FAIRY], lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY] 
or mystic bird as scaling defense cards

Important to know about this strategy is that it is slow, playing all the fairy spawn cards takes time at the beginning of the fight and leaves you vulnerable.
You can use elder fairy to get extra mana to play all the fairy spawns, you can use immune to protect your self while doing so, and finally once you have enough fairy spawns you
can take dark sigil. This will let you play all your magic cards for 2 HP instead of mana. Since most spawns heal 3 under 50% HP, you will be able to maintain HP 
while playing all your spawns. But be very careful not to die before you get to them or once you've played them all and don't have any healing left.
For that you can use skills like Book of magic which heals half of the HP loss, or Nephil [ANGEL] who heals you 6 HP when below 50%.

Fairy spawn cards:
- Fairy princess [FAIRY], doesn't rely on number of fairies but number of magic cards in hand, very good early
- Red bloom [FAIRY], not great but is a fairy spawn, poison can let you complete quest for Medusa [BEASTMAN]
- Blue bloom [FAIRY], good because gives shield
- Blessed Fairy [FAIRY][ANGEL], good because attacks, shields and heals, but it depends on number of angels.
Other good fairy cards:
- Moon fairy [FAIRY], very good regardless of fairy synergy, free magic card and helps search for a specific card
- Elder fairy [FAIRY], very good for the mana, once it removes it doesn't count as a fairy in your deck anymore but still great card
- Fairy priestess [FAIRY], good card once the quest is completed, you can afford to take it in low inferno but at some point you won't have time to complete the quest
- Fairy Warrior [FAIRY] or Lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY], scaling attack and shield base on number of fairies, take only one as they are combat cards and don't exile. It's one of your defensive option.
- Night Fairy [FAIRY], this card lets you reshuffle your deck and grab all the fairy spawns in your exile immediately, very good if you have dark sigil and want them for
healing before you cycle through your whole deck. As it doesn't exile, it can get annoying in your deck but it's alright. Beware you might not want the overcharge which will
make the spawns not free anymore, so be careful to have another race in your deck.

Other good cards:
- Mystic bird, although not a fairy, he scales with fairies like Fairy Warrior [FAIRY] and Lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY]. The nice thing is that he is a magic card and not combat,
he also attacks every enemy but that's not very important here as it won't be your main source of damage.

Advice : very good strategy in low infernos where first fight are easy enough to let you get your deck started. In higher infernos, only do it if you find cards like
Fairy princess [FAIRY], Moon fairy [FAIRY] and elder fairy [FAIRY] first, which are good anyway, before committing to too many fairy spawns.

Attack strategy: Energy golem alone
Another idea is to not use fairy spawns, focus on defense and use energy golem to power up itself. If you can get to a 4 card deck you can use all your mana on energy golem


Attack Strategy: Multiplying attacks
These cards are affected by strength multiple times. You will need sources of permanent Strength for this strategy in order to scale up against more powerful enemies.

Best: Cthool, the Darkmaster [ANCIENT] is one of the most powerful multiplying attack cards because it grows in power during the fight as it copies your cards with Exile. For best results, don't let your deck grow too large and combine with Exiling cards that give permanent buffs, Immune, or Daze. You can also get cards like Old Jester or Moon Fairy so you can search for Cthool. Because Cthool is useless by itself, avoid getting it until you have some good cards that Exile.
Good: Beast Champion [BEASTMAN] / Lady of the Dark Souls / Apprentice Knight. For the last two, make sure you have cards that give Mana so you can increase their attack multipliers.
OK: Angel Fighter [ANGEL] / Blade of Justice / Young Fighter. These don't scale beyond 4x attack. Angel Fighter is good for recovering a bit of HP, but it will rarely allow you to recover completely in a single fight because the enemy will likely die before that happens. Blade of Justice is nice because it is not affected by the Block debuff.
Requires luck finding the right Race:
Mystic Bird / Sou, The Blade of Wind [ANCIENT] - Many ANCIENT cards work well by themselves, and if you collect enough of them these cards can provide decent attack damage. Mystic Bird doubles as a strong Shield card, but note that it does not count towards any Race total. Sou is good for the extra Mana even if you don't end up collecting many ANCIENT cards.
Lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY] - Each copy counts as two in the multiplier total, and they can be buffed with Bear doll and Fairy Doll skills. BEASTMAN has more useful cards for Warrior than FAIRY.
Angel Archer [ANGEL] - You can also get copies of Angel Priestess [ANGEL] and Angel Captain [ANGEL], both of which Exile.
Fairy Warrior [FAIRY] - It's difficult to build a good FAIRY deck using Warrior class, so unless you're up for a challenge, pick something else.
Attack Strategy: Self-duplicating cards (Pick only one!)
These cards duplicate themselves for increasing damage. You can take multiple copies, but pick only one type of card in order to maximize its effectiveness.

Damage and Poison - These do not need extra Strength, though if you have enough Strength you may be able to kill enemies without needing a strong defense. A few sources of Daze/Immune or some good defensive Skills may suffice.
Robo Wasp [ROBOT] (Uncommon) - Cheap and effective. Multiple copies are better.
Cualdir, Ethereal Blade [ANCIENT] (Rare) - Worth spending all your Coins on if you can stick with an ANCIENT deck. Extremely powerful, and effective even with a medium-size deck. Cards that synergize well with Cualdir include: Sou, The Blade of Wind [ANCIENT] for Mana, Alestar, Tranquility Defender [ANCIENT] for Shield, and Mystic Bird for Shield. Because Cualdir uses the number of ANCIENT cards in your deck, you are better off getting extra copies of Sou for Mana and Alestar for Shield instead of duplicating Cualdir.
Damage only - Using these cards on lower Inferno levels you may be able to get away with no extra Strength if you have strong defense, but it's risky. Because the base damage is only 2, a little Strength goes a long way. +2 Strength would be double the damage!
Masked Swordsman (Common) - This one puts copies in your Exile pile. Try to get multiple copies so you can play it more often.
Self-Destruction Bot [ROBOT] (Common) - This is risky because it damages you. You will want to pair this with a healing card. You can take multiple copies so you can play it more often, but make sure you can heal enough to recover the lost HP. The nice thing about this one is that it counts the number of ROBOT cards, so you can pair it with others such as Flamethrower [ROBOT] and Iron Colossus [ROBOT].
General Wukong [BEASTMAN] (Rare) - Attacks all enemies instead of one, but does not exile, so you will see it more and more as you use it. You will want a lot of extra Strength because when this overruns your deck you will have a hard time defending. Because of this risk, I would recommend one of the other options instead, but if you do use this you can pick Ant Wizard [BEASTMAN] for Shield.
Tier 1 Cards
1x Lady of the Knight (Mana) - Don't take more than one copy, because that will decrease its effectiveness. You will always want 3 combat cards in your hand when you play this, so if you have another Magic card in your hand like Mage, you may want to play that first so you have a chance to draw a combat card and get the Mana back from Lady of the Knight.
1-3x Dark Shielded Knight (Shield) - Combined with permanent Resistance, this is one of the strongest Shield cards. If you have a Magic card in your hand at the same time you may want to play that first to maximize the Shield you get from Dark Shielded Knight.
1-2x Apprentice Guard (Shield) - It may not seem like much to new players, but combined with extra Mana and permanent Resistance it can give you a lot of Shield.
Beast Emperor [BEASTMAN] (Double Damage/Strength/Resistance) - This is one of the best cards you can get. Perfect as a starting bonus, and worth buying.
V01-B01 [ROBOT] (Mana/Resistance) - Free +1 Mana and +1 Resistance for some turns. Only play it if the Shield would save you from dying or it will prevent HP loss and you think you can still defeat the enemy without it. Having it in your hand will make Lady of the Knight (LotK) give you one less Mana, but the Mana you get from V01-B01 compensates for that. If you have two in your hand with LotK, it makes LotK useless. However, I'd say it's still worth getting multiple copies because it pays for itself if you want to play it. You can also opt for Wizard instead of LotK.
Sou, The Blade of Wind [ANCIENT] (Attack/Mana) - This is worth taking just for the extra Mana you get when you play it as the first card in your turn. It doesn't give you Overcharged, so you can use it in addition to other cards that give Mana.
Souls Priestess (Mana) - Take it if you don't have Lady of the Knight.
Sun Priestess (Strength/Resistance) - Great if you don't take any DEMON cards.
Wizard of Nature (Strength/Resistance) - This will convert temporary Strength/Resistance into permanent Strength/Resistance, so it's good even if the only way you get those buffs is from two or more cards giving Mana and Overcharged.
Sigil Essence (Immune/Resistance) - Take no more than 2 cards that require empty draw/discard pile because you don't want to be stuck with an unplayable hand.
Snow Queen (Immune) - Buys you time during the fight.
Earth Seed (Quest/Daze) - The upgraded version is great, but taking this in World 1 before you have a strong defense could be risky. It will make your deck worse until you upgrade it, so if you can't do that before fighting Elites or the Boss, you may be in trouble. However, if you take it right before fighting a Normal enemy you can probably linger there and complete the 200 Shield Quest whether or not you have an improved defense.
Portia, Keeper of Silence [ANCIENT][ANGEL] (Attack/Daze) - Works well against Gorilla King, combined with Immune or enough Shield. Also stops enemies from Evoking (Lycanthrope) or applying debuffs (Giant Wasp, Evil Forest Guardian).
Alestar, Tranquility Defender [ANCIENT] (Shield/Attack) - Very strong defensive card. Combine with more ANCIENT cards, Resistance, and Armored for best results. Works well with Dhorion, Holy Sentinel [ANCIENT].
Dhorion, Holy Sentinel [ANCIENT] (Resistance/Armored) - Free source of permanent Resistance. Temporary Armored is nice, too. Don't play it unless you have to, because you want your Resistance to keep increasing.
Space Commander (Armored/Shield) - When low on health it gives you 10 Shield, which is better than Guard, so it can help you survive in World 1 before your defense is fully developed. It really shines when you have more than 50% HP and a good source of Shield. Great for Shield Bash strategy, or even just playing defensively. Having this card also allows you to upgrade Space Fighter into a powerful Attack and Shield card, so grab that as well if you plan to have at least 3 Races in your deck.
RoboWitch [ROBOT] (Armored) - This will greatly improve your deck if you can generate a lot of Shield. Works well with Shield Bash strategy.
Cthool, the Darkmaster [ANCIENT] / Azahr, the Exiled Wizard [ANCIENT] - If you have powerful cards that Exile such as Sun Priestess, Wizard of Nature, or Snow Queen, you can reuse them with Cthool or Azahr. These are two of the most overpowered cards in the game.
Tier 2 Cards
Wizard (Quest/Mana) - It becomes better than Lady of the Knight if you have enough Shield to linger on an enemy to complete the Quest.
Sapphire Guard (Shield) - One copy recommended. Can give you free Shield or temporary Strength/Resistance via Overcharged, and can increase cards played per turn (for Apprentice Guard, Apprentice Knight, or Lady of the Dark Souls).
Cthool Acolyte (Shield) - Exiles itself and another card. Good for early game to defend yourself and thin your deck. Combine with restarting the fight to get the best results.
Medusa [BEASTMAN] (Daze) - Buys you time during the fight.
Xatior Order of Wizards (Daze) - Buys you time during the fight.
Blue Witch (Resistance) - Good permanent Resistance boost.
Red Witch (Strength) - Good permanent Strength boost.
Angel Captain [ANGEL] (Strength) - Good permanent Strength boost if nothing better is found. Slightly better than Guardian of the Sigil but can't be played for free.
Guardian of the Sigil (Strength) - Good for early game if nothing better is found. Take no more than 2 cards that require empty draw/discard pile because you don't want to be stuck with an unplayable hand.
Fairy Queen [FAIRY] (Strength/Resistance/Quest) - Good if you have enough Shield to linger on an enemy to work towards completing the quest. Very tedious, though.
Nephil [ANGEL] (Attack/Heal) - Works well as a starting bonus because it can help maintain your HP and provides a decent attack. It can help you survive World 1.
Ultron [ROBOT] (Attack/Heal) - Works well as a starting bonus. It can help you survive World 1 and slowly recover HP.
High Witch (Weak) - Good replacement for Mage, because the upgraded version exiles. Plan to remove or transform Mage after getting this.
Spirit of Magic [ANCIENT] (Weak) - Good replacement for Mage. Free play for early game, so it does not have to interfere with Lady of the Knight / Dark Shielded Knight. It's still good for late game even after it upgrades. Plan to remove or transform Mage after getting this.
Keyra, the Shy Soul [ANCIENT] (Weak/Shield) - Good replacement for Mage. Doubles as a Shield card. Although it does not exile, it's still worth having. Plan to remove or transform Mage after getting this.
Spirit of Defense [ANCIENT] (Shield) - Free extra Shield for early game. It can help you survive. After 20 plays it upgrades and the upgraded version isn't that great, so try not to play it unless you need it.
Seeker of the Light (Heal/Remove Debuffs) - One of the few Magic cards that do not exile and may be worth getting. If you have enough Shield to linger on an enemy, this will allow you to fully heal, and it will help by removing Debuffs in late game.
Vampire Lord (Heal) - Nice to have for free. One of the most desirable healing cards for early game, because it's a Combat card that Exiles and won’t interfere with any strategy you may end up following.
Druid of the High Elves (Strength/Resistance/Heal/Immune) - This card does it all, but it will cost you 5 Mana. Having this may be better than having no Immune cards, but Snow Queen and Sigil Essence are better choices because of the Mana cost. Make sure you have ways to gain Mana before taking this.
The Timeshifter [ANGEL] - Returns all Exiled cards to your deck. This is good later in the game when you already have multiple powerful cards that Exile such as Snow Queen, Medusa, Earth Seed, and Wizard of Nature.
Elder Fairy [FAIRY] (Mana) - Nice to have for free. Because it gives you Mana without Overcharge, it will rarely interfere with Lady of the Knight. Note that after it Removes itself, it will stop affecting Cualdir, Ethereal Blade [ANCIENT] as well as Lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY].
Mage Thief (Coins) - Earn extra Coins during a fight. Get it when you have a strong defense and you think you can spare one turn during a fight. Allows you to remove your unnecessary cards quicker and buy stronger ones. You can combine this with cards that give Armored so you can set up your Shield the turn before you play Mage Thief.
Mystic Bird (Attack/Shield) - Strong Attack & Shield when you have enough Strength/Resistance and at least three ANCIENT or FAIRY cards in your deck. Weak otherwise.
Ant Wizard [BEASTMAN] (Shield) - This is a strong Shield card if you are building a BEASTMAN deck with permanent Resistance. Weak otherwise.
Lullyp [BEASTMAN][FAIRY] (Attack/Shield) - Strong Attack & Shield if you are building a BEASTMAN deck with permanent Strength + Resistance. Weak otherwise.
Tier 3 Cards
Illusionist (Weak/Attack) - Works well as a starting bonus because it is free damage + weak. It can help you survive World 1.
Young Witch (Weak/Mana) - Mostly useful for the extra 2 Mana for one turn when played on a Weakened enemy. May be a good early pick if you haven't found another card that gives you extra Mana yet.
Young Mermaid (Strength/Resistance) - 1x is OK if you are lacking in Strength/Resistance boosts. Useful for extra Shield when an enemy has Weak.
Moon Fairy [FAIRY] (Search) - Nice as a free reward. It helps keep your deck consistent.
Apprentice Witch (Search) - 1x is nice to have if your deck is getting too big and you have an important card you want to pick out when necessary. The target card ought to be quite important because this costs extra Mana.
Ambassadress of Peace (Shield/Armored) - This is nice to have if you find it and you need help with defense, but I wouldn't recommend spending Coins on it.
Shadow Assassin (Attack) - Nice as a free reward once your deck has good defense and losing 3 HP per fight is acceptable. I wouldn't recommend spending Coins on it, though.
King Neptune / Mermaid Queen (Quest/Strength/Resistance) - Because the Quest of 30 Strength or Resistance can take a long time to complete, it's unlikely these would help you in World 1. If you have a strong defense and a source of temporary buffs, you could linger on an enemy long enough to complete the Quest. Without upgrading, these cards are equivalent to Fighter, and they will hurt your chances of winning.
Skills
Invisibility Potion (5 Gems) - It may not seem like much, but this is a very efficient use of Gems. Dodging the first attack gives you extra time to set up your strategy for the rest of the fight.
Ice Block (7 Gems) - Also a very efficient use of Gems. More versatile than Invisibility Potion, as you can either use it to buy you time at the beginning or save yourself from death. Try to avoid triggering it until you really need it. You can restart the fight if this triggers too early and you think it's possible to delay it more.
Frost Nova (9 Gems) - Think of this as an automatic extra turn at the beginning of the fight. Allows you to set up your strategy during the first turn without worrying about defending.
Freezing Shot (9 Gems) - Every 10 cards, daze a random enemy. Combine with extra Mana each turn for best results. Most of the time this will improve your chances of winning, but it can make it tricky to fight certain enemies that block damage while in the waiting state. It's still worth getting. Since this is a random outcome, you can restart the fight if you really need to daze a certain enemy at a specific time to save your HP.
Key of the Portal (9 Gems) - Always an improvement to any strategy. Provides you extra Mana for a head start and improves consistency. You can combine this with restarting fights for even greater chances of winning.
Necronomicon (9 Gems) - Extra 1 Mana per turn, but halves your HP. Combine with defensive Skills listed above for best results. Focus on setting up a solid defense and most of the time it doesn't matter how much HP you have. Take this if you think you will be able to avoid most damage. If you think you may take some hits, then Have a Meal at every Merchant after taking this Skill.
Demon Eye (7 Gems) - Extra 1 Mana per turn, but you become blind. Combine with defensive Skills listed above for best results. More efficient use of Gems than Necronomicon, but requires more familiarity with the game. Some strategies benefit from the extra Mana so much that it makes sense to take it. Example 1: Small deck with Robo Wasp or Cualdir that ramps up damage so quickly that the enemy dies before you take a hit. Example 2: Quickly build up Shield so high with Armored that it doesn't matter what the enemy does. Shield Bash for the kill. Bonus! You can use this tool to help plan your moves. It's not 100% accurate for all situations, but it's good enough to be useful.
Stone Skin (8 Gems) - If you're having trouble building a strong defense and your health is low, this can turn things around and save you.
Circular Shield (8 Gems) - Works best with small decks. Extra Shield that doesn't require Mana is always good to have.
Snail Shell (6 Gems) - This can be good for accumulating Shield before you draw your other cards that give Armored buffs. Combine with cards that give Armored, or it won't be very useful.
Life Sword (8 Gems) - Get it if you consistently stay at full HP and you're using attacks that multiply damage. Good with Masked Swordsman, Robo Wasp, Cualdir, Lady of the Dark Souls, Beast Champion. Don't get it if your strategy is Shield Bash or if you can't maintain full HP.
Gold Ingot (7 Gems) - Coins can be more useful than Gems. If you don't see any better Skill, get this.
Phantom Boots (13 Gems) - Most of the time, this makes the game seem like it's in easy mode. It will never be bad for you to get this, but you may shoot yourself in the foot by skipping to the Boss without preparing well enough. Keep in mind that when you fight enemies, you can get both Coins and Gems (or a free card). If you visit a Merchant, you're only getting Coins.
Mana Battery (12 Gems) - It's not immediately obvious that this is good, but occasionally you may have a turn that doesn't require spending all your Mana. When that happens, this will allow you to save it for the next turn to have an extra strong defense when needed. You can also get rich quick with Mana Battery and Mage Thief.
Phoenix Feather (10 Gems) / Blessing of Sanctuary (10 Gems) - If you are worried you may lose, you can get these. When they trigger, restart the fight instead of continuing, unless you can find no way to survive the fight without them.
Shuriken Attack / Kunai Attack (8 Gems) - With the right deck, these skills are a good source of permanent Strength and Resistance, respectively. Combine with sources of extra Mana so that you can reliably play 4 Combat cards per turn.
Rock Dagger (9 Gems) - This one is just OK, considering its price. If you don't have any better option and you really need to improve your defense before the next Merchant, you can get it.
Potion Maker (6 Gems) - This is an option if you regularly lose HP and you don't have any healing cards, and you are OK with healing slowly. It's a one-time cost and won't take up Mana during a fight.
Apple Pie (5 Gems) - Excellent as a starting bonus, because it can help you survive World 1. However, it's probably not worth spending 5 Gems on in World 1 because by the time you have that many Gems there is probably only one Merchant left and you're better off spending 50 Coins to heal immediately.
Knowledge of Strength (8 Gems) - Not the most efficient use of Gems, but useful if your attack strategy is not Shield Bash.
Knowledge of Resistance (8 Gems) - Not a very efficient use of Gems, but it's an alternative if you are lacking in cards that give permanent Resistance. You will have this automatically if you're using Class Bonus #1.
Piece of Coal (8 Gems) - This is a weird recommendation, but it gives you +2 Resistance for the same price as Knowledge of Resistance, and you can restart the fight until the debuffs you get are favorable. Only get it if you have the patience for a Reroll Adventure!
Mana Dagger (9 Gems) - This may seem good, but it's usually a bad idea because of Overcharged. Don't get it, unless you do not plan on getting extra Mana from cards.
Bones Armor (7 Gems) - Don't get this, because you get Shield from playing Combat cards and Bones Armor won't trigger!
